# Chapter 5 - Are We Cognitively Free?

**On-chain:** https://ordinals.com/content/b6f80ee4c032bb323590526ade70c6a31e1b0be116c41b1e5e7b06f4ad213193i0

> We don't need no education, we don't need no thought control.

— – Pink Floyd

Ah, the iconic words of Pink Floyd, a battle cry for intellectual freedom and self-determination. These lyrics, from the timeless album Another Brick in the Wall, resound with a message as relevant today as it was decades ago.

In a world where information is just a click away, where the Internet is at our fingertips, the question must be asked: are we truly cognitively free? Do the vast arrays of information and the ability to access it equate to intellectual liberation, or is there a hidden cost, perhaps a cognitive cage, that we are not seeing?

Internet pioneer Ted Nelson said, "The purpose of computers is human freedom." That may have been true in 1974 or perhaps it was simply his truth at the time. But five decades later, we are clearly on a different track.

This chapter will delve into these inquiries, exploring the effects of the Attention Economy on our minds and thought processes.

The Answer Lies Within Search

Search is important. 93% of online experiences begin with a search.[^1] Google holds a staggering 72% of the total search engine market share.[^2] Nowadays, most people (81%) perform some online research before a large purchase.[^3] Voice search such as Amazon's Alexa device accounts for 10% of total searches. In 2021, Google Search brought in just under $149 billion, an increase of 43% over $104 billion in 2020,[^4] or $32 per Internet user.

Existing search tools, however, don't remove superfluous information for non-trivial search queries or improve our processing capacity. Search has changed little since Google debuted two decades ago, other than the knowledge graph upgrade that connects simple queries to definitive answers. For example, resolving the name of a site to its URL or answering "how high is Mount Kilimanjaro?" It is also useful for getting definitive answers to how to use applications.

The knowledge graph is the main reason zero-click searches have reached over 60% of all searches. But they haven't been able to reduce irrelevant results. Regardless of whether the graph has a recommended answer, the search engine purports to have millions of recommendations.

According to Google, there are over 5 million terabytes of data spread all across the Internet. Some estimate that the search giant's indexes are less than 0.004% of the Web.[^5] The tiny fraction of the data that search engines index reflects two factors. First, Google does not index the deep web, which makes up about 95% of the Web and contains private data behind paywalls and organizational firewalls. Second, Google treats audio and video as black boxes, as they cannot index raw audio or video, which accounts for much of the data stored on the web. With YouTube videos, they use metadata to display recommendations on Google and YouTube search. YouTube also uses the metadata, along with user data, to deliver video recommendations on the app.

In sum, Internet search – our primary content discovery tool – is full of gamed results, considers only metadata for multimedia content, contains duplicate content, and is rife with false information. As a result, people can't discern authentic material from gamed results or false information. As mentioned earlier, 75% of people only look at the first page results.[^6] Our fixation on first page results requires businesses to invest in SEO to improve their rankings, hoping to get on the first page.

It's hard for sites to get their fair share of search traffic in Google-relevant categories. It isn't a coincidence that Google properties receive greater than 12% of the clicks from relevant searches.[^7] They cherry pick the results page to promote their services.

For example, when we searched "translate" on Google Search (and ignored their auto-complete suggestion to translate.google.com), they had 50% of the top search recommendations, including the coveted first position and a form at the top of the page. The form had entry fields for the translation text, its language, and the desired language of the translation.

Below the form, the first recommended "organic" result was the Google Translate site. The next two recommendations were competing translation sites. The next three were Google translate apps in the App Store, Google Play, and Chrome. Then two recommendations for competing translation sites.

Centralized search alters systems of human consciousness by manipulating the search order, promoting stories they favor, and removing stories they don't. Several years ago, Eric Schmidt, then chief executive of Google's parent company, Alphabet, admitted that Google was engineering systems to "takedown" or "de-prioritize" content for political reasons.[^8] He justified this as concerns about Russian propaganda.

As Fred Campbell notes, Google exercises significant control over the visibility of political content on the Internet.

> It's a fact that Google's technological prowess and monopoly power give it the ability to exercise significant control over what political content is seen on the Internet. Its participation in Washington's lobbying game gives it ample incentive to wield that power.

— – Fred Campbell, Forbes, Sept. 4, 2019 9

Google Search and YouTube have censored conservative, libertarian, and hard left viewpoints. The February 2018 YouTube Purge was the world's first mass de-platforming event, with tens of thousands of YouTube channels being deactivated, which prompted the creation of many free speech platforms such as Gab, BitChute, and Parler. YouTube ended up reinstating most of the channels but continues to shadow ban or otherwise demonetize alternative voices. Many commentators have questioned the authority and motivation of Google and other platforms in the wake of de-platforming waves in 2021 and 2022.

The Ahrefs Blog analyzed one billion webpages to see what pages get traffic from organic search and why. They found that 91% of the Web gets no traffic from Google, foremost because they do not have backlinks (i.e., incoming links from another website).[^10]0 While it's possible to get organic search traffic without backlinks, only 5% of pages without backlinks get search traffic and the majority less than 300 organic visits each month. It's also possible to not get search traffic despite having backlinks. Some pages don't get organic search traffic because they don't have long-term traffic potential, the page doesn't match search intent, or the site is unindexed.

Google says it "has indexed hundreds of billions of pages and is aware of over 100 trillion."[^11] Assuming these 100 trillion pages make up the surface web, the low indexing coverage could be due to Google excluding pages that don't meet their editorial standards, business model, or fit within their acceptable narrative band.

This begs several provocative unanswered questions. How does Google decide which sites to exclude from crawling? Does Google exclude sites from their index, preventing you from knowing about their existence? How does search manipulation affect our thinking?

## The Attention Economy is Dominated by Two Firms

Two corporations control over two-thirds of the global digital advertising market – Alphabet (formerly Google) and Meta (formerly Facebook). In 2021, Facebook and Google made a combined $333 billion USD from digital advertising revenues, up 40% from the previous year.[^12] Facebook and Google can produce massive revenue streams because they charge advertisers for accessing users based on activity data in targeted advertising campaigns.

Through psychological profiles and high-traffic websites, advertising algorithms tailor advertisements to the user's specific desires, needs, and activity. This business model works well for an uninformed user base that doesn't have viable alternatives to the Internet platforms. Recent cultural shifts and technological innovations, however, are exposing vulnerabilities in this business model.

Society realizes the negative effect technology can have on our minds and information dissemination. In 2017, a leaked internal report from Facebook executives stated that the company's AI can monitor posts and photos in real time and discern the feelings of young people. They can tell when we feel stressed, defeated, overwhelmed, anxious versus nervous, stupid, silly, useless, and a failure.[^13] As chronicled in the 2020 film The Great Hack, the firm Cambridge Analytica used Facebook's advertising tools to extract data from 87 million Facebook users. This raised broad concerns about how Facebook mishandles user information.[^14]

In 2021, Frances Haugen, a former Facebook employee, released tens of thousands of damaging documents about Facebook's inner workings to the press, members of US Congress, and federal regulators.[^15] These internal research and communications showed the company was aware of the toxic risks of Instagram to the mental health of teenage girls. They were also aware of the prevalence of drug cartels and human traffickers on Instagram and WhatsApp. Haugen testified both in a UK parliamentary hearing and in the US Senate.

Nonetheless, seeking to capture attention with ads at the top and sides of webpages and in feeds is flawed, imprecise, and can be annoying. Facebook ads rely on the gross instruments of webpage metadata, user web activity, abandoned shopping carts, and conversations. This is profitable because the marginal cost of posting ads is small compared to the sale price of big-ticket items, and even an affiliate commission. Hence, marketers can be profitable if a tiny percentage of ad views convert into a sale. That's why the Web is full of ads.

Life After Google author George Gilder thinks Google won't be around in a decade.[^16] Upon its release in December 2022, OpenAI's ChatGPT was hailed as a potential rival to Google, despite analysts admitting that this version was not yet near that level. The biggest limitation in this respect is that it cannot search the web. Other limitations include hallucinating, harmful instructions, or biased content, and having limited knowledge of the world and events after 2021.

Meanwhile, leaders of premier startup accelerator Y Combinator Paul Graham and Michael Seibel think Google Search is already dying. A Google-reluctant contingent is emerging that appends "Reddit" to their search terms to gain better results.[^17] They point out that Google results for health, product reviews, and recipes are rife with clickbait and SEO spam. (This and the lack of ads is where ChatGPT excels over Google.)

We tried one example a commenter provided: "Honda Civic review." The first page of results, below Google's featured content, recommended 2022 Honda Civic pages on top car sites and popular sites that cover cars. This included, for example, Car and Driver, Motor Trend, and US News. Most either rated or ranked the car, but only a couple linked to actual customer reviews.

> *How to improve your search skills*

> When we appended "Reddit" to the search terms, the results were less promotional. First, the page had no featured content. Second, the Reddit page results appear to have authentic comments from everyday people. The more useful results depend on what you want. If you want authentic reviews rather than SEO pages of companies invested in you buying a car, try appending "Reddit" to your search query. Or, the name of some other community you trust.

> We also suggest that you try chatbots such as OpenAI's ChatGPT and Google's Bard. ChatGPT is a chatbot that remembers previous statements and allows users to regenerate responses, ask clarifying questions, and re-submit edited prompts. Please note, however, that ChatGPT may occasionally generate incorrect information or produce harmful instructions or biased content. Additionally, it has limited knowledge of the world and events after 2021.

## But How Does this Affect Our Cognition?

A digital existence brings about new questions regarding freedom and rights. What does freedom mean online? Digital worlds differ from the physical. In the physical world, you cannot change all trees to oaks and all fruit to figs. You can do this in a virtual world and anything else supported by the environment. The virtual world is conceptual and exists only on screens and in our minds. Hence, more so than the physical reality, freedom in the digital realm is cognitive.

Chamath Palihapitiya, a former Vice President of User Growth at Facebook, has gone as far as to say that users of Facebook are being "programmed" and are giving up their "intellectual independence."[^18] He doesn't want to be programmed himself, emphasizing he "doesn't use this shit" and his kids may not use "this shit" either – while recommending that everyone take a "hard break" from social media. Reflect on that.

He fears bad actors can manipulate large groups of people and that we compound the problem in our quest to create an idealized version of ourselves:

> "We curate our lives around this perceived sense of perfection because we get rewarded in these short-term signals – hearts, likes, thumbs up – and we conflate that with value and truth. But it is fake, brittle, short-term popularity that leaves you even more – admit it – empty than before. It forces you into a vicious cycle where you seek the next thing to do for a dopamine hit.

He says these tools are eroding the social fabric of how society works:

> "Today we live in a world now where it is easy to confuse truth and popularity. And you can use money to amplify whatever you believe and get people to believe what is popular is now truthful. And [believe] what is not popular may not be truthful."

Sean Parker, Facebook's founding president, spoke several years ago about how the platform exploits human psychology and said the founders of the company understood what they were doing.[^19] He said Facebook "changes your relationship with society," and "interferes with productivity in weird ways ... . God only knows what it's doing to our children's brains."

When Facebook was being developed, its aim was: "How do we consume as much of your time and conscious attention as possible?" This mindset created features such as the like button, which gives users "a little dopamine hit," encouraging them to upload more content. "It's a social-validation feedback loop ... what a hacker like myself would come up with," says Parker. "You're exploiting a vulnerability in human psychology."

"All of us are jacked into this system," Tristan Harris says. "Our minds can be hijacked. Our choices are not as free as we think they are."

But what are the cognitive implications of the Web, especially considering the lack of safety and the infringements on our cognitive freedom? For people who have felt unsafe or experienced trauma online, the lasting effects reduce their potential for meaningful connections and interactions. These feelings generate fear of others on the Web, diminishing the possibility and our capacity for collective cognition.

Here are some important aspects that impact everyone. When someone else chooses what you can see, you lose autonomy, freedom, and agency. Adding restrictions on speech further diminishes cognitive freedom and democracy.

When faced with a choice, your mind gets information from both internal and external sources. Internal sources include what we see and sense, as well as our memories, knowledge, mental models, and intuitions. External sources include other people and traditional media, but the Web dwarfs them in importance. Hence, whoever controls what you see and can say on the Web has an enormous influence on your thinking and behavior.

> In the ethereal realm of existence, cognitive cages hold sway, invisible to our mortal eyes yet potent in their confinement of the mind. For within the chambers of intellect and emotion lie the core of our being – the essence that defines our humanity. In their mastery over the mind, they wield dominion over both our corporeal vessels and the profound symphony of our souls.

— > – Bridgit DAO

Based on what they are not showing us or allowing us to say, what blind spots are they creating? What narratives are embedded in our feeds? What are we not considering? Are we in a Wachowskian matrix? Are algorithms Orwellian? Answers to these questions reveal the invisible bars of the cognitive cages that limit our thinking.

Could social media be tricking us to relinquish our cognitive freedom for access to a social media tool?

A trap tricks someone to put themselves in a situation that restricts or otherwise compromises their freedom. Could social media be tricking us to relinquish our cognitive freedom for access to status updates and content previews? These applications are simple yet sticky. What is cognitive freedom worth to you?

Before we delve deeper into cognitive freedom, we must journey back to its origins. The French Revolution, which took place from 1789 to 1799, was a period of significant political and social change in France. The key protections put in place during the French Revolution helped to establish a more democratic and just society in France, laying the foundation for modern civil liberties and human rights. The most notable protection was the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, which was adopted in 1789. This document outlined the fundamental rights and freedoms of all citizens, including the right to liberty, property, and security, as well as the right to free expression and religion. It also established the principle of equality before the law, stating that all citizens are equal and entitled to the same rights and protections under the law.

The French Revolution's emphasis on individual rights and freedoms played a key role in shaping the political and social landscape in many parts of the world as these ideas spread. France's Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen inspired the development of the Bill of Rights in the United States. The Bill of Rights, which was added to the United States Constitution in 1791, outlines the fundamental rights and freedoms of American citizens, including freedom of speech, religion, and the press, as well as the right to bear arms and the protection against unreasonable searches and seizures.

In addition to individual rights, the French Revolution also influenced the United States regarding democracy and popular sovereignty. The French Revolution helped to spread the idea that governments should be accountable to the people and that individuals have the right to participate in the political process. The United States Constitution reflected these ideas, establishing a federal system of government with a system of checks and balances to ensure that no one branch of government becomes too powerful.

During World War II, the basic war aims of the Allies – formally, the United Nations – were the Four Freedoms: freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom from fear, and freedom from want. Towards the end of the war, they debated, drafted, and ratified the United Nations Charter to reaffirm fundamental human rights. But after discovering the atrocities of Nazi Germany, in 1948, the Allies deemed it necessary to create the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The declaration includes 30 human rights, including freedom from slavery and torture, equal protection of the law without discrimination, and freedom of movement.

But existing rights frameworks do not explicitly address cognitive freedom. Conspiratorial ideas notwithstanding, it is interesting that government-sanctioned education is our only right related to cognition. Long ago, Edward Bernays, a protégé of Sigmund Freud, noted that media and, in particular, propaganda could control thinking. In the 1940s, the CIA determined that the big screen (in movie theaters) was the best way to control thinking. Declassified CIA documents and historical accounts of the agency's activities show Project Mockingbird was part of the CIA's larger effort to shape public opinion and influence foreign policy through covert operations. The program involved the CIA funding and producing films, documentaries, and other media content that was designed to promote certain themes or ideas. Numerous accounts also indicate the CIA used movie production companies as a cover for their activities.

In the 1950s, television quickly became deeply entrenched in the psyche of the nation and the world. In the 1960s and 1970s, the CIA had several programs to control the U.S. media that may also have had operations in other countries, including Canada and Europe. Project Mockingbird also recruited journalists and other media professionals to work as agents and to disseminate propaganda and other forms of covert messaging. The modern industries of marketing and advertising – which depend on media – have always sought to influence the mind and create behavior change. On the Web, they have developed into a precision enterprise involving AI, algorithms, and filter bubbles – the mental matrix.

This enterprise to influence your mind is an assault on cognitive freedom. The mind plays a primary role in cognitive freedom because it's the source of our thoughts, beliefs, and ideas. It is where we process and analyze information, form opinions and judgments, and communicate with others. Therefore, cognitive freedom is closely tied to the freedom and autonomy of the mind. When we have cognitive freedom, we are able to think, express, and communicate freely without external constraints or influences. This enables us to pursue our own interests, goals, and values, and to make our own decisions about what and how we behave.

While cognitive freedom is important, it does not give us the right to harm or exploit others. We have a responsibility to respect the rights and beliefs of others, even if we disagree with them. As parents, it's our job to keep our children safe and to help them make good decisions. This may involve setting boundaries and limits on their cognitive freedom in certain situations. While we should strive to protect and promote cognitive freedom, there will always be natural limits to what is acceptable and responsible. We need to find a balance between the freedom to think and express ourselves, and the need to respect the rights and well-being of others.

To have a truly democratic society, individuals must have the freedom to think and express themselves without interference or coercion. This includes the ability to access and consume information without manipulation. The internet and social media play a significant role in shaping our perceptions and beliefs. The standard operations of social media, however, involve collecting and analyzing user data to tailor content and advertisements to specific individuals, resulting in the presentation of a narrow range of viewpoints and perspectives. This can manipulate public opinion, distort reality, and influence thinking, hindering the ability of individuals to form their own opinions and make informed choices, such as what to purchase and who to vote for.

To safeguard our cognitive freedom, it is essential that we have control over the information we receive and the way it is presented to us. This means protecting privacy and promoting transparency and accountability online, and particularly in social media. Only by ensuring the freedom to think and express oneself freely can we create a democratic society that truly reflects the will of the people.

## The Desert of the Real

Have you noticed how content goes through cycles, showing up through the years? Sometimes the same, sometimes with slight differences. One that comes to mind is, "What would you tell your teenage self?"

STOP! Think how many times you've seen this question, what your answer is right now, and whether the exercise provides value.

It's an interesting question that adds value each time we engage with it. Sometimes it reminds us of something to remember or integrate into our life. Other times it's something we are integrating now, but could imagine starting earlier.

Anyway, noticing the cycles of mimicked, remixed, and regurgitated content leads some to think that the Web is not what it seems.

According to the Dead Internet Theory, we have already lost the war for our minds. Popularized in January 2021 by a forum user named IlluminatiPirate,[^20] the theory suggests that AI creates most of the content online. He thinks bots, aided by "influencers" on the payroll of corporations that work with the government, propagate the artificial content. He says, "the US government is engaging in an artificial intelligence powered gaslighting of the entire world population." The theory says the organic web died in 2016 or 2017.

IlluminatiPirate says, "I've seen the same threads, the same pics, and the same replies reposted over and over across the years." He says algorithms not only recommend but also generate all modern entertainment. IlluminatiPirate gives a nod to deep fakes,[^21] whose existence shows what we watch online may not be real. He also links to a New York magazine story from 2018 called How Much of the Internet Is Fake? Turns Out, a Lot of It, Actually.[^22]

IlluminatiPirate says the "positive feedback loop" from people glomming onto a trending perspective drives the creation and proliferation of AI-generated content. Following trends and amplifying what others, especially experts, are saying earns real-time positive feedback as likes, comments, and shares. This creates an obsession to "play it safe" by aligning with trends, which is easier and more rewarding than creating original content. Tracking our engagement, the AI continues to improve the content they make.

The theory also says bots play a significant role in amplifying and proliferating artificial trends. Bots drive the conversation because they are lightning fast, controllable, and don't need breaks. Web users must copy the bots to stay on-trend. Bots are an indispensable tool for manipulation, because they will not go off-script.

We don't subscribe to the theory that AI generates most online content. But it may soon. Bots are prevalent on social media. A 2017 study by Indiana University found that bots account for 9 – 15% of active Twitter users.[^23] A large-scale experiment proved that nobody – neither Twitter admins, tech-savvy social media users, nor innovative applications – can distinguish bots from legitimate users.

And as mentioned earlier, the Web is full of duplicative, artificial, and fake content. While we agree AI is part of the problem, as of early 2023, we think most inauthentic content stems from the incentives of the Attention Economy. Influencers align with trends to get boosted by the algorithms. Their followers engage with the content, which signals the algorithms to select similar content, creating a positive feedback loop for similar content. Further, companies generate a lot of duplicative and meaningless content to improve search rankings.

That said, with the emergence of generative tech in the second half of 2022, we think the Dead Internet Theory may soon be realized. Dead Web: The Dark Side of Generative Tech posits that an explosion of generative applications will flood the Web with AI-generated content such that, in 3 – 5 years, most web content will be artificial.[^24] Whatever people can create, applications will generate. Generative content will include articles, images, video, podcasts, tweets and other social posts, emails, books, logos, avatars, UX-UI designs, SEO content, and even entire websites. The potentially negative ramifications for content quality, diversity of perspectives, cognitive freedom, and democracy are deeply troubling.

## Structural Limits to Value

Structural characteristics of the Web limit its originality and value. As implied by the Dead Internet Theory, the competition for eyeballs in the Attention Economy, coupled with various types of censorship, forces content creators to homogenize their content. It also rewards the "first complainer," regardless of the facts. Hence, web content – generated by humans and AI – aligns within the bands of what's trending and what the platforms deem acceptable.

Further, links are dying on the web. As mentioned above, commercial sites avoid outbound links that do not support their bottom line. Links are also rotting away. Link rot is when a page disappears, breaking all links to the page. This even happens with important sources.

> *Want to save a link?*

> Are you writing a book and need to save a reference for later? Or maybe you're creating a resources page for a website and want to ensure that the links remain accessible in the future. Whatever the case may be, using a permalink is a great way to create a permanent link to a resource.

> A permalink, also known as a "permanent link" or "persistent link," is a URL that remains unchanged and links directly to a specific webpage or resource. This is different from a regular link, which can change or become broken over time. By using a permalink, you can ensure that the resource you are linking to will always be accessible.

> Creating a permalink is easy. Simply copy the URL of the webpage or resource you want to link to and paste it into a permalink generator. Some permalink generators like permanent.link allow you to specify the identifier of your permalink. Click submit to create a permanent link for accessing the resource in the future.

> If the content is really important, you may also want to store it on a thumb drive and make a paper copy in case the internet goes down for an extended period of time. This way, you can access it when you need it.

A study found that 50% of the links embedded in judicial opinions of the US Supreme Court since 1996, when they started using hyperlinks, no longer work.[^25] The study also found that 75% of Harvard Law Review links no longer work. In a study of 2 million outbound links found in articles at nytimes.com since its inception in 1996, 25% of links to specific pages no longer work. The older the article, the less likely its links work; 72% of the links from 1998 are dead.[^26] But that's not all.

Google's index may be a Potemkin Village, in the sense of any construction (literal or figurative) whose sole purpose is to provide a vibrant external façade for something not faring well. The idiom comes from the myth of a fake portable village built by Grigory Potemkin, former lover of Russian Empress Catherine II, to impress her majesty during her journey to Crimea in 1787. The original story was that Potemkin erected phony portable settlements along the banks of the Dnieper River that were disassembled after Catherine passed by and re-assembled farther along her route to be viewed again as yet another example of Crimea's prosperity.[^27]

What if Google's search index is not doing as well as they have led us to believe? Would it make a difference if they have just half the results they say? What about 1/20th?

For any general query, Google says there are millions, if not billions, of search results. If, however, you search with whatever term you want, Google only shows a tiny fraction of what they claim.

> *A firsthand view of a virtual Potemkin Village*

> On January 8th, 2023, we entered Futbol on Google Search, which purported to have found "about 861,000,000 results" in 0.50 seconds. Yet, when we clicked through, there were just 19 pages with a total of 181 results. On the bottom of page 19, Google tells us:

> In order to show you the most relevant results, we have omitted some entries very similar to the 181 already displayed. If you like, you can repeat the search with the omitted results included.

> The underlined text above linked to a new search results page, this time with "about 926,000,000 results." Yet, nine clicks later, we found out that there are in fact only 39 pages with a total of 383 results.

> Thus, for the Futbol query, Google Search showed 4 ten-millionths of the results they claimed. Let that sink in.

> Please try it out yourself and let us know what you find.

> Enter a simple query like Self Knowledge, Artificial Intelligence Danger, or Threats to Democracy. Note the number of results Google reports below the tab menu near the top of the page. Scroll to the bottom and click the link for the 10th page. On each new page, scroll to the bottom and click the rightmost number link which increments by 4 each time (e.g., 14, 18, 22). Within about 50 pages (or less), you will probably encounter a page saying there are no more unique results. It's the same with Bing.

The Dead Internet Theory submits this as evidence that most online content is duplicative. The theory suggests that Google censors the Web by choosing which sites get indexed and may screen sites from the search results. It notes that Google doesn't recommend blog posts or articles from unpopular sites. We, however, doubt this makes up for the huge discrepancy between what they say and what they display. When we tried it, all the search results were sites whose names we already knew.

Despite this, Google states they have millions of results for every query, wanting us to not only think the internet is vast but that Google indexes a large amount of it. But in reality, Google delivers a small fraction of what they claim. What does it mean if Google is a Potemkin village? Why would Google give us the impression the searchable web is much larger than it is?

We're interested to know what regulators think. The implications are ground shaking – the searchable web is tiny. We've got huge blinders on, and Google has been and continues to lie to us. Though we're not implying Google makes our lives horrible or anything like that, we don't like being misled. Why would Google think it's ok to lie so grotesquely?

When Google's founders published a paper on the search engine they had invented, they included an appendix about advertising and motivations. They said advertising causes mixed incentives, making it "crucial to have a competitive search engine that is transparent and in the academic realm[^28] ... . The goals of the advertising business model do not always correspond to providing quality search to users ... . We expect that advertising-funded search engines will be inherently biased towards the advertisers and away from the needs of the consumers."

Google's founders also thought less blatant biases are "likely to be tolerated by the market. For example, a search engine could add a small factor to search results from 'friendly' companies and subtract a factor from results from competitors. This type of bias is very difficult to detect but could still have a significant effect on the market."

Yet, over two decades later, in 2022, despite being "crucial," no transparent, academic competitive search engine exists.

As we've seen, the searchable web may not be as vast as we've been led to believe, and the motivations of the gatekeepers of the Internet may not align with providing us with the most unbiased and accurate information. But this revelation is just one piece of a larger puzzle: the impact that technology and our consumption-driven society is having on the planet and our future. In the next chapter, we examine the connection between global challenges and exponential technologies. But it's not all doom and gloom. As we'll discover, the International frameworks and regulations seek to help us steer towards a more sustainable future. The question is, are we headed in the right direction? Let's find out.

## Notes

1. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/optimize-seo-results](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/optimize-seo-results)

2. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/search-engine-market-share](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/search-engine-market-share)

3. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/research-online-before-purchasing](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/research-online-before-purchasing)

4. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/google-q4-2021-earnings](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/google-q4-2021-earnings)

5. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/google-small-fraction-internet-indexed](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/google-small-fraction-internet-indexed)

6. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/first-page-results](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/first-page-results)

7. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/googles-takes-search-traffic](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/googles-takes-search-traffic)

8. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/google-power](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/google-power)

9. Ibid

10. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/search-traffic-study](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/search-traffic-study)

11. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/google-20th-anniversary](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/google-20th-anniversary)

12. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/ad-money-2022](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/ad-money-2022)

13. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/facebook-advertising-insecure-teens](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/facebook-advertising-insecure-teens)

14. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/cambridge-analytica-scandal](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/cambridge-analytica-scandal)

15. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/whistleblower-facebook-harm-children-democracy](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/whistleblower-facebook-harm-children-democracy)

16. Although Google's legacy search business is likely to shrink in the coming years, we think it's too early to count Google out, given their gargantuan investment in AI since 2012. We also think it unlikely that Google will be able to extrapolate its dominance in legacy search to content discovery dominance in the next level of the Web.

17. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/google-search-dying](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/google-search-dying)

18. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/facebook-cambridge-analytica-leak](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/facebook-cambridge-analytica-leak)

19. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/president-facebook-exploits-psychology](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/president-facebook-exploits-psychology)

20. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/dead-internet-theory](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/dead-internet-theory)

21. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/deep-fakes](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/deep-fakes)

22. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/internet-fake](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/internet-fake)

23. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/human-bot-interactions](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/human-bot-interactions)

24. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/dead-web and deadwebbook.com](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/dead-web and deadwebbook.com)

25. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/supreme-court-link-rot](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/supreme-court-link-rot)

26. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/collective-hallucination](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/collective-hallucination)

27. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/potemkin-villages](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/potemkin-villages)

28. [https://perma.cc/8GDJ-K6AX](https://perma.cc/8GDJ-K6AX)
