# Chapter 16 - Your Move

**On-chain:** https://ordinals.com/content/1c27417cf5d7cbb9c37706bfbc685e0c533620f047539380afb72697f0365dbdi0

The best time to unleash the Overweb was 20 years ago. The second best time is now. – Bridgit DAO

Their egos were on the line as the giant countdown clock loomed overhead. They were close to solving the final puzzle. With it, they'd make their escape and enjoy the glory of success and bragging rights. But they had to untie 4 giant knots and discover the final door's passcode. With just two minutes left!

This was their first experience of escape rooms.[^1] They didn't know what to expect. They soon realized, to escape, they would need to solve a series of puzzles before time ran out. The escape room challenged their ability to collaborate on a shared goal. "It's like team-building on steroids." They involve a theme or story and have varying degrees of difficulty. Escape rooms can bring out the best and worst in teammates as the clock ticks on and stress sets in.

We think humanity's in an escape room. Humanity needs to escape from its self-terminating path, which has us barreling towards existential threats. Time is short. According to the UN, we have until 2050 to make a massive shift. To escape, we must cultivate collective intelligence. We doubt humanity can pass this initiatory test without getting the best out of our primary tools. We're not even close with the Web.

To date, humanity's tools haven't supported the level of connection, communication, and collaboration needed to address our global challenges. While the Web has plenty of tools for individuals, it doesn't provide tools for humanity to work as a collective, such as a shared contextual view of the information ecology. This absence limits our capacity to sense-make and work together, much less to develop collective intelligence. Further, most people are disinterested; unaware of our global challenges, unwilling to prioritize them, and/or lacking confidence in their ability to provide value. We are seeing the worst in some of our teammates.

> *Time to Move Up the Doomsday Clock*

> The symbolic Doomsday Clock began in 1947 to warn humanity of the dangers of nuclear war (Figure 16.1). It shows how close our planet is to complete annihilation. It started at 7 minutes to midnight. In January 2020, the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists moved the clock up from 2 minutes in the previous year to only 100 seconds away from midnight. They made the change because of nuclear proliferation, failure to tackle climate change, and "cyber-based disinformation."

> Figure 16.1 The Doomsday clock.

> In January 2022, they maintained the same level in their annual statement. But in January 2023, they moved up the Doomsday Clock to 90 seconds, closer than ever to midnight, largely because of the war in Ukraine and the risk of nuclear escalation. The new clock time was also influenced by the continuing threat of climate change, and "the breakdown of global norms and institutions needed to mitigate risks associated with advancing technologies and biological threats."

> In their annual statement, Rachel Bronson, PhD, President and CEO of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, said: "We are living in a time of unprecedented danger, and the Doomsday Clock time reflects that reality. 90 seconds to midnight is the closest the Clock has ever been set to midnight, and it's a decision our experts do not take lightly. The US government, its NATO allies, and Ukraine have a multitude of channels for dialogue; we urge leaders to explore all of them to their fullest ability to turn back the Clock."

> The Metaweb can help turn back the clock by providing powerful new tools for collaborating on global challenges, such as climate change, biological threats, and AI alignment. For example, forming a massive online research collaborative or MORC would enable researchers, practitioners, policymakers, and other stakeholders worldwide to collaborate without direct coordination. It can also connect the Splinternet into a shared contextual view that could potentially be helpful for supporting diplomatic responses to regional conflicts. By working together, we can harness the power of technology to build a safer and more sustainable future for all.

Considering our existential quandary as an escape room, we need massive amounts of freedom, collaboration, expression, and creativity to solve its puzzles. But that's what Today's Web and the Attention Economy suppress if not prevent. Today's web is neither safe for nor supportive of creative collective responses to humanity's situation. It is unsafe because of scammers, abusers, and false information. In optimizing for engagement, the Attention Economy amplifies herd behavior, meme slinging, and clout chasing. Further, we don't have cognitive freedom or adequate online tools for working together as a collective.

In one of his videos, Boyce Watkins, an American author, social commentator, and investor, said his #1 job was to encourage his viewers to be free. Boyce says:[^2]

Let's lay the ideas on the table. Freedom of expression, thought, ability to brainstorm, and look for the best ideas wherever they lie. You can't solve an equation when you have too many constraints. The more constraints, the harder to solve the problem, the narrower the set of potential solutions.

This chapter is an open invitation to those called to shape the future of the Internet and humanity. It will guide you on how to get started, what roles are available, and how you can contribute to this decentralized system. Join us in this exciting journey, as we work together to solve planetary challenges and build a better future.

Together, we can ensure that the doomsday clock stops in the knick of time and that humanity has a solid foundation to thrive on and offline. So come, be a part of this movement, and let's build the future we want to live in.

## Finding Your Place

The Metaweb has opportunities galore. Like webpages, the space above a single webpage is unlimited. The emergent action above the webpage is in the Overweb the Mask Network (mask.io), and a Web3 platform built on the NEAR Protocol called Dapplets. With any ecosystem, it's about finding your place, and how to create value. We'll focus on the Overweb and we encourage you to check out our friends at Dapplets as well. In the next section, we explore the bridger role and other ways to contribute and reap rewards.

> *Dapplets*

> On Today's Web, only website owners can create and earn money from business processes that run on their websites. This is because ownership means full control over the users' communications.

> The Dapplets Project disrupts this paradigm by creating technology that enables new kinds of applications – dapplets – that democratize the web experience. Dapplets run on top of existing websites, in the website context, but out of the website owner's control. This new paradigm enables brand-new applications and business opportunities.

> Dapplets technology also has an important social effect. It allows censorship-resistant user flows on websites, even for banned content and banned users. Dapplets cancel cancellations.

> Dapplets is a true Web3 project: unstoppable, permissionless, anonymous, open-source, and decentralized, not only on the backend but on the UX level too. Find out more at [dapplets.org](https://dapplets.org).

## Are You a Bridger?

Bridgers organize, share, and monetize their research by building bridges.

Bridgers are the 15% of people who search multiple times daily. They can't help re-searching their topics of interest on the Web, seeking new information and perspectives that help them understand the Why. Bridgers think it's all about "connecting the dots," and the bridge is emblematic of what humanity needs. Let's make bridge the word-of-the-decade. For bridgers, most research begins with online search. They seek to fill gaps in their understanding and the relevant information ecology. Bridgers combine a drive to learn more about a topic with knowledge of keywords, search terms, advanced search expressions, and which search engines are best for specific use cases. They may spend hours searching on the Internet.

Bridgers discover and learn the most amazing things. They find needles in digital haystacks. They have frequent breakthroughs in understanding.

But until now, they haven't had effective options to organize, share, or monetize what they learn.

They could write a post or make a video about it. But that's time-consuming with uncertain benefits. Unless they have a following, the potential exposure (and therefore impact) is fleeting and limited. Hence, they often relegate their amazing discovery to a preferred information silo. This could include pasting into Google Docs or Evernote, texting or emailing themselves or friends, bookmarking, or posting to a Telegram group or their Facebook Wall.

But with Metaweb, they can make bridges, monetizing their research. Hence, we consider them information ecologists.

In sum, bridgers are avid knowledge creators and consumers who share some commonalities. They:

- Do informational and transactional searches.
- Are interested in understanding the Why and applying knowledge.
- Want to learn and advance knowledge within their communities.
- Want to supplement income or donate efforts to support a cause.

## Our Community

The Overweb is an inclusive community that provides income opportunities for people of all backgrounds and major web languages. We all have our own unique combination of awareness and blind spots. By holding space for different perspectives and bridging different languages, the Overweb creates the possibility of people learning from one another if not together.

The ecosystem has many roles for individuals, including:

- Bridge builders aka Bridgers
- Ad watchers (a compensated activity)
- Content curators
- Translators
- Transcribers of video and audio
- Content validators
- Bad actor detectives
- Community managers
- Bridgework service providers
- Community voters

## Broad Applicability

The Overweb is building an ecosystem which includes bridgers, creators, freethinkers, as well as websites, advertisers, web marketing companies, and organizations that want to engage with their audience around information and content.

We expect sports, food, politics, health, celebrities, hip-hop, pets, and blockchain/crypto to be among the first information ecologies to harden. We're excited to see what kinds of bridges and topics create the most value. It could be elections, football or fútbol, Kardashians, or cats. Or perhaps more serious issues like the Ukraine war, boosters, crypto, or regeneration. Your guess is as good as ours. We're excited to see what bridges become popular and how they can elevate humanity and help identify false information.

The Metaweb can organize information ecologies and provide decision context for many domains, including those that involve many data and content sources, such as but not limited to:

- Upleveling knowledge and wisdom
- False info analysis and fact checking
- Legal texts and records
- Community decision making
- Learning subjects
- Researching subjects
- Literature reviews
- Proofs
- Analysis of thinking and biases
- Decision analysis
- Risk mitigation
- Product development
- Corporate decision making
- Developing marketing plans
- Story design and analysis
- Sports draft choices
- Investment
- Reviewing performance videos
- Analysis of differences in beliefs
- Analysis of groupthink
- Education
- Psychological analysis
- Sociological analysis
- Political analysis
- Biological analysis
- Chemical analysis
- Engineering analysis
- Design processes
- Book/film/music reviews and analysis
- Criminal investigations
- System design
- Business model canvas
- Project management and evaluation
- DYOR (Do your own research)

The Metaweb supports several types of enterprise participants as well:

- Advertisers who want to reach viewers focusing on topics related to their offerings.
- Partners with aligned products and services who want to reach consumers focused on topics related to their offerings.
- Online sites with high-quality content who want traffic and engagement. Examples include YouTube shows, podcasts, radio and television shows; news sites; organic/sustainable products; knowledge economy sites; teams; nonprofits; and blogs. The Overweb can provide them with an analysis of attention on their site so they can understand which ideas garner attention, keep people on their site, and generate advertisement click-throughs.
- Organizations with teams working on projects that involve organizing and processing information from the Internet. These include journalism, detective work, research and development, advocacy, and hundreds of other use cases. This is especially useful for large corporations and organizations that may have teams in multiple divisions and/or geographies and network organizations and other types of alliances and associations of multiple organizations that need to share best practices and/or otherwise engage in collaborative knowledge building.
- Knowledge ecology companies who create and trade bridges for the asset value, create content (e.g., state-of-the-research summaries), and provide services to the Overweb ecosystem (e.g., building genesis constellations of bridges on a topic). We see companies in less developed countries with a history of having been sites for outsourcing – such as India, the Philippines, and Africa – forming businesses or adding divisions to pursue the Overweb business opportunity.
- Social networks and other sites who want to extend their presence to overlays that operate anywhere on the web.
- DAOs, online communities, and companies who want to extend their reach to any page on the web.
- Journalists, independent researchers, activists, research institutions, universities, and others who collaborate and build upon each other's research.

They all can receive compensation for the value their contributions create in the network. Together, bridgers will break knowledge silos, question the status quo and mainstream narratives, propose alternative perspectives, and connect disciplines.

Bridging surfaces the perspectives of diverse communities as they become relevant. Often, marginalized peoples have skills and world views that enable them to survive if not thrive in difficult circumstances. They have knowledge to share. We see enterprising individuals and groups in lower-income communities and developing countries creating businesses around building bridges and/or offering bridgework and other Overweb services to the developed world.

As the Overweb ecosystem grows, bridging could become a digital land grab similar to NFTs and domain registration, but for knowledge. Bridging rewards creativity, insight, and breakthroughs while creating rich data for supra-information interactions, next-generation apps, chatbots, and search engines.

Bridges self-assemble into the Internet of Ideas, which enables rapid content discovery, discernment of false information, learning breakthroughs, and unparalleled creative expression. Thus, by decentralizing links, the Overweb resolves many of our earlier concerns about the Web. It also builds a shared context and collective intelligence that can help fulfill the Internet's original promise. Let's go, bridgers!

## Metaweb Mindset for Creators

Now that you understand what the Metaweb is, we suggest trying on "the Metaweb mindset," a four-step process for opening up value creation possibilities in your field(s) of interest. This process provides guidance for engaging with the Metaweb.

First, identify the most pressing and intriguing issues and topics. Bring them to the forefront of your awareness. Note questions for which you need answers. Review and update your to-do list. Look at the news to see any developments which affect your priorities. Identify your priority issues or topics for the moment. Note any keywords or hashtags that can help find and distinguish your issues and topics.

Second, think about the types of people who might be helpful as you move forward with your priority issues or topics. List the webpages or types they are likely to visit. Also, keep a list of thought leaders, pundits, and/or influencers with whom you have common interests. If you don't know relevant webpages or people, search for some. You may also want to join relevant meta-communities.

Third, get active in the Metaweb on the pages you identified in the previous step. Install the Presence extension. Visit the pages and filter the canopis with keywords to surface relevant conversations and people. You can reply to the conversations or send the person a direct message or even a friend request. Next, look at the visible list. Filter to find people with your interests. You can send them a direct message or a friend request.

The fourth step requires a higher level of awareness. Pay attention to your thoughts and emotions when you are scanning webpages. Notice what captures your attention or triggers thoughts and emotions as you scan the page. Note the specific content or claims to which you are reacting.

To fill this void, consider making bridges, notes, or using other smart tags for the content or claim. If you have relevant thoughts, make a public or private note. If inclined, search for related information and make bridges.

The following information could produce useful bridges:

- Studies related to the subject
- The source of the information
- More general information related to the subject
- Historical information
- Supporting evidence
- Contradicting evidence
- Models
- Opinions
- Judgments

## Metaweb Mindset for Builders

As a builder, the Metaweb is your oyster. Your main tools are smart tags and overlay applications. In the future, you will extend meta-communities, create on-page interactions in the Presence sidebar, and build open-source algorithms. The section discusses the mindset for building on the Metaweb.

First, identify the problem you are addressing and what's not working on Today's Web. For example, SaaS sites may want to extend their reach to the entire web and add new on-page functionality. Or, perhaps, a community you are working with needs more information to make optimal decisions, or would benefit from new types of interactions on relevant webpages.

Second, identify use cases that would resolve the problem. With the existing web service, we may want to consider how smart tags can attach information and interactions from our application to content snippets. We can also consider how an overlay application can surface relevant information and interactions from our application on relevant webpages without someone having to attach a smart tag.

Consider what information would improve decisions, how to build and access this information, and how to deliver it. If we wanted community members to disseminate information, we would consider a smart tag implementation. If it wants to be automatic, it's better suited for an overlay application.

Third, design and develop the user experience and interface within the open-source frameworks for smart tags and overlay applications. Register your creations with the Overweb application registry.

## Let's Head in this Direction

The Web is one of the most influential technologies in history. In three decades, over 4 billion people are online. The Web promised to change how we interact and gain knowledge. It was to raise all boats by making knowledge accessible to everyone. Though it has fulfilled some of its promise, the Web hasn't made humanity more collectively intelligent. We, however, need collective intelligence now. Humankind must change how it operates to address our global challenges. The Web was a good start.

We need a next-generation web that connects information and people and gives them a presence above the webpage. No longer trapped in social handles with limited rights and freedom of movement, people can meet on webpages of their common interest. As you read these lines, know that you can meet your people online now. On a canopi.

Canopis side-step filter bubbles, connecting real people who share a common interest. Jump on one of our canopis or other sites where people congregate in canopis. Children's book lovers might visit the Pachaverse canopi. The Metaweb-curious and serious might visit the canopis for Bridgit DAO, Presence Browser, and the Overweb.

We also need to get information out of silos. This is done with bridges, the connective tissue of the Metaweb. Bridgers connect two pieces of content with a relationship. If bridges have the correct relationship, they post to the public ledger and self-assemble into a universal knowledge graph that connects the world's information on an idea-by-idea basis.

We need to shift from an Attention Economy that harms people to a knowledge economy that builds a thriving ecosystem and creates a cornucopia of value, builds knowledge, and inspires real action in the world by leveraging our collective wisdom. To do this, we must harness the Web to build collective intelligence and the key collective cognitive capabilities: sensemaking, meaning-making, and choice-making.

Imagine a web where platforms no longer exploit user data or think of people as users. This is about how we choose to spend our time and energy. If you weren't already clear, the transition is now. If we're heading to the New Earth, everything needs to change. We need tools that bring out our best. Humanity needs a next-level Web for real people, not serial abusers, fake accounts, or unidentified bots. Communities need safe digital spaces.

The Metaweb can host this technological shift.

Decentralized public space above the webpage enables us to exercise choice and regain control over what we see online. We use evidence from the Metaweb for sense-making and a shared context to build knowledge, learn, and think together.

The Metaweb defrags the Web and transforms it into an integral information ecology with deep layers of context for online ideas, building a Web worthy of our trust. A web where algorithms and online business models create value for real people and respect digital rights, including the right to inspect the code. Providing a shared context that supports discernment of what to believe online opens the cone of possibilities to an engaged and informed populace and a future that is accountable, free, and democratic.

Last but not least, we now need to leverage the potential power of the Web to support the unprecedented levels of connection, coordination, and collaboration that are needed to address our existential threats. As Elon Musk says, the future is bright, but we cannot be complacent. We now understand what is missing. If you want to take part, the future hyper-dimensional web is your oyster.

Without a doubt, the Web is the best way to share information. The Web can reach anyone on the planet. With the Metaweb, it'll be even better. If humanity is to become wise, it will only happen with a meta-layer above the web. Your move is to join us and help build a future to be proud of.

## A Bicycle for the Mind

At the close of the last decade, with – for example – the Cambridge Analytica election hacking and the exploitative data practices of Internet Platforms, we saw in retrospect what can go wrong when the platforms adhere to a "Move fast & break things" ethos that ignores effects on humans and society. As we consider how to repair trust and reimagine relationships between Internet platforms, people, and data in the coming decade, a view into how computers began provides valuable context for focusing our attention and resources.

In a 1989 documentary, Steve Jobs said the computer is our most remarkable tool. "The equivalent of a bicycle for our minds." Riding a bicycle is the most efficient means of locomotion. Next best are salmon, horses, and jet transport.[^3]

In an earlier presentation about Apple, Jobs said the bicycle shows humans, as toolmakers, can make tools that amplify our inherent abilities. The bicycle improved humans' ability to move efficiently. Building computers improves our ability to think efficiently.[^4]

All due respect to Mr. Jobs, but thinking more efficiently has proven insufficient. Despite billions of computers in use, far surpassing the human population, humanity faces mounting existential risks (e.g., nuclear wars, artificial intelligence, and ecological crises caused by unsustainable human activity). A democracy seeking to mitigate such risks cultivate an informed populace and develop tools that build humanity's collective intelligence.

## Bicycles for the Collective Mind

This era reflects great division among people, massive degradation of the planet's life support systems, and unprecedented distraction. All exacerbated by technology. Most tech extends systems that create or contribute to the problems. Most impact-focused innovations address symptoms rather than the problem's roots. Without addressing the roots, solutions are likely to be temporary fixes, with problems manifesting through alternate pathways.

Our premise is that one root of all the problems is the lack of collective intelligence and wisdom, often reflecting a corresponding absence of shared knowledge. The logic goes: if we had more shared knowledge, collective intelligence and wisdom, we'd be smarter and wiser, and therefore make better choices, diminishing if not resolving the threats. We may be smart as individuals, but as the human collective, we need to uplevel. Especially as machines barrel towards AGI.

Although collective intelligence is the aim of science, to date, humanity has experienced little progress. Perhaps it's the lack of a technological category or meta-category focused on collective intelligence or wisdom. As new systems emerge, a "named" category can provide a container to connect, support, and illuminate projects.

As toolmakers, we can make tools that amplify our shared knowledge and collective intelligence. Let's make bicycles for the collective mind.

We propose WisdomTech – a new genre of computing that focuses on improving thinking, accelerating learning, and building collective intelligence in service to a democratic, regenerative future and our growing human capacities and consciousness. WisdomTech – anchored by emerging technologies such as AI, extended reality, big data, and distributed ledger technologies – can, for example, expose misinformation and help bring about a more useful virtual experience, while protecting personal data.

WisdomTech could address different aspects of the information value spectrum from data (unitary facts and figures) to knowledge (data in context), sense-making, and wise choice-making, including

- Improving dissemination and access to knowledge.
- Building knowledge while keeping a reference to its provenance.
- Improving pattern discovery, critical thinking, and decision-making.
- Convening evidence-based dialogues among diverse thinkers.
- Exposing fake news and misinformation – all the while protecting data ownership, free speech, and human rights.

Acknowledging that exponential technology and, in particular, AI will far outpace advances in human intellectual capacities, WisdomTech pioneers collective approaches to data, sense-making, and choice-making that prioritize safety, resilience, regeneration, inclusion, and trust. WisdomTech enables the creation and improvement of technologies, products, companies, and markets that strive for positive social and environmental impact, including protecting and nourishing our potential and human rights. Aligned with the European Union's flagship Next Generation Internet program, WisdomTech supports an Internet that is sustainable, resilient, inclusive, and trustworthy.

WisdomTech would create bicycles for the collective mind.

Bicycles for the collective mind are tools that build shared knowledge and collective intelligence. By definition, shared knowledge and collective intelligence require harnessing the "wisdom of the crowd." As noted by James Surowiecki in the book "The Wisdom of Crowds," crowds often outperform experts when there is a diversity of opinion, independent thinking, local knowledge, and an aggregation mechanism.

The Overweb provides such an aggregation mechanism in the Universal Content Graph, which enables ecosystem participants to build online knowledge maps of ideas and the relationships between them, creating a shared context for collaboration and communication across intellectual boundaries. Shared context is what the International Bateson Institute calls warm data[^5], but for online information. The Overweb aims to connect all the world's information, enabling 360° context for any idea – whether on the web, in a digital overlay on physical reality, or the metaverse.

Again, we call this Ubiquitous Context. Imagine the possibilities for collective intelligence if everyone – no matter where they are, in a digital world, online, or in physical reality – had access to deep layers of context.

Mapping online knowledge is but one approach. Humanity must build our capacity for collective intelligence in this upcoming decade, leveraging crowd wisdom across disciplines and worldviews in service to a democratic and sustainable future.

## A New Winning Narrative

A winning narrative explains how a system can meet the needs of all stakeholders. It emphasizes our best and guards against our worst. It's the story we want to tell.

This new winning narrative aims for honesty, pragmatism, and frankness in charting a new course for humanity. The new narrative addresses the paradoxical reality that – at the same time – many key economic and wellness metrics (e.g., GDP and life expectancy) are at all-time highs, yet other metrics concerning, for example, resource depletion, topsoil levels, and species extinction portend a less than bright picture. Not to mention the existential threats that humanity faces, such as exponential weaponry, climate disruption, artificial intelligence, robotics, and nanotechnology.

Consider that age-old maxim, Knowledge is Power. From the beginning, humans have leveraged knowledge to consolidate power. For most of human existence, knowledge was sequestered, secured, and rationed in silos – libraries, academia, companies, institutions, and mystery schools. Gaining knowledge was often expensive in time, money, social capital, and/or lives.

But we are living in revelatory times. Unprecedented amounts of information are at our fingertips through mobile devices and chatbots. We're unable to ingest and process this information now. Once we develop such capabilities, we'll better understand our world. As we shine a light in the shadows, patterns will reveal themselves. More truth and understanding will rise to the surface of human consciousness. Collective cognitive breakthroughs will reveal solutions for our intractable problems.

The WisdomTech Emerging narrative recognizes that humanity has made huge strides, co-evolving with tools, so much that not-so-ancient societies would see modern humans as gods. Yet humanity's existence has been a momentary blip if we consider all time.

An apt metaphor for humanity is a teenager. Young people operate with underdeveloped prefrontal cortexes until their early-to-mid twenties and are thus prone to rash decisions. The Internet is a child. It's natural that the Internet – prioritizing potential for impact – is subject to reinvention. Hence, the conversations around the Next Generation Internet, led by Europe, as well as the Web3 movement, the AI containment movement, and this book.

Meanwhile, thought leaders and social enterprises are taking a stand for technology that builds knowledge, raises consciousness, and grows collective wisdom. They believe that increasing our collective intelligence is the most important thing that humanity can do. We can start by reinventing humanity's open knowledge base, the World Wide Web.

Regarding wisdom and knowledge building, today's Internet is dysfunctional.

We think the Internet is far from reaching its potential for building humanity's knowledge base, our understanding of what it all means, and our ability to make smart choices on an individual and collective basis. This not only affects our emotional and mental well-being and our capacity for self-actualization and self-transcendence, but also cripples our capacity for collective intelligence and other collective cognitive capabilities.

The problem is the Internet proliferates content rather than building knowledge, understanding, and wisdom. Social accounts pump out content to gain followers. Companies produce a lot of content for machines, bots, and web spiders. New content is often uninformed by previous content and the links are based on what the page author knows and who they or advertising networks want to promote.

At its essence, the Web is transient – we discuss new content for an instant. Research from Google Trends found that the average 'big' news story lasts about seven days before the public moves on to the next crisis. Although they remain available, online conversations have short lifespans unless they go viral. False information is more likely to go viral than the real thing. Conversations are haphazard because of the structure of the containers that hold them – think about how challenging it is to glean different perspectives, logic, and sources from a TikTok feed, a thread of tweets, and Facebook comments.

Even Reddit, which seems more oriented towards knowledge sharing, shuts down conversations after six months by "archiving" them. Reddit – like the comments on Facebook and forums – is unstructured, so it is challenging to get a full sense of the community's perspectives and virtues. Reddit encourages anonymity, which diminishes transparency regarding conflicts of interest that may exist for contributors and makes it easy for people to keep their online comments separate from their actual identity. Hence the rampant troll problem on the platform.

WisdomTech would help gather relevant information for a decision. It would help us discern false claims in the news, as well as resolve conflicting information. It would also disincentivize if not prevent the creation of duplicate content. WisdomTech would help us with sensemaking, identifying patterns, and understanding the Why. WisdomTech would help us make wise decisions based on our knowledge and understanding.

It would keep content and conversations alive by creating spaces where people can have safe, structured ongoing conversations about vital matters. WisdomTech would enable smart choices by individuals and communities. It would enable people to observe their own thinking (e.g., their confirmation biases) and how the community thinks about issues.

Improving critical thinking, knowledge discovery, and collaboration, as well as conflict resolution, could enable us to transcend circumstances that separate us; come together in dialogue around claims, perspectives, and needs; and make better choices.

We must live the story we want to tell. In 2030, what do we want to say about now? An unacceptable story is a beleaguered and traumatized humanity looking back from the future and reflecting that we never tried to use technology to make ourselves smarter, despite our deep understanding of the Internet's shortcomings. Despite five plus decades of warnings from Doug Engelbart and his progeny. Despite this book.

Fortuitously, a cadre of next-level web companies backed by forward-thinking investors are emerging in the WisdomTech arena, and hold great promise for raising consciousness and collective wisdom. An example is Betaworks' Tools for Thinking accelerator out of New York City. We expect little from Silicon Valley.

If we are up to the challenge, Wisdom Tech changes the game for:

- Emotional and mental health.
- Human knowledge, understanding, and wisdom.
- The prospect of humanity making smart choices about its future.

## The Internet's Savage Daughter

At the end of 2020, inspired by the song "Savage Daughter," sung by a trio of shamanesses in a sound healing ceremony in the tropical dry forest along the coast of San Juan del Sur in Nicaragua, a plant told us a story about a wild feminine spirit long suppressed in most aspects of human experience that is now emerging alongside the coronavirus.

The refrain of Mistress Windreth Berginsdottir's song "Savage Daughter" is:[^6]

> "I am my mother's savage daughter,

  The one who runs barefoot, cursing sharp stones. I am my mother's savage daughter,

  I will not cut my hair, I will not lower my voice."

Below we recount our recollection of the plant's story.

From time immemorial, the plant told us, this wild feminine spirit has been associated with truth. In ancient Egypt, the deity of truth, Ma'at, was a goddess. Leonardo da Vinci thought of truth as female, "Truth was the only daughter of Time." Truth and women both align with beauty and purity.

Although suppression of this wild feminine spirit has been uneven, the plant noted, "Nowhere has her suppression been deeper and more complete than in the invisible mechanisms and machinations of the Internet." But not how you think.

The plant described a future Internet – a veritable truth machine. A deeply connected, multi-dimensional Internet that layers knowledge on top of webpages. The Internet of Ideas.

Imagine a more feminine, truthful, and authentically wild Internet.

An internet connecting information and people. Information is no longer in silos. People are no longer in bubbles. Imagine an online future with fair value exchanges. Platforms no longer exploit user data. Users are now participants. Anyone you see is real and in good standing. No unidentified bots, fake accounts, or serial abusers.

This technological savage daughter liberates our minds. She enables us to regain control of our attention and exercise choice in what we see online and what we don't. The savage daughter gives us evidence-based information and knowledge for sensemaking. She provides a shared context for collaboration that enables humanity to think, learn, and build knowledge together for the first time.

Search and filter bubbles become the lazy choice. We value, nurture, and measure trust. Online business models and algorithms create value for real people and respect their digital rights.

The Web's de-fragmentation into an integral information ecology provides access to deep layers of context for online ideas. People have the tools to determine for themselves what to believe online. Informed and engaged citizens take part and vote on policy in this wild democratic future.

As we listened to the plant's story, we became excited about this technologically savage daughter and her potential to heal our deeply fragmented and polarized digital world. We had the sense that such a shift in our vital technologies could also heal our inner worlds. But our pragmatic side realized not everyone wants a truth machine.

Sensing our need for reassurance, the plant riffed off celebrated author and political activist Arundhati Roy and Mistress Windreth[^7], "Another Internet is not only possible, she is on her way. On a quiet day, I can hear her breathing ... One of her names is Bridgit.8 She will not cut her hair. She will not lower her voice."

We need the Savage Daughter that demands to connect everything, for us all to be heard, for us to integrate our shadow. She enables the higher-order masculine, which runs through us, the deep desire that many of us feel to make the major shifts that right our relationships with ourselves, one another, and the planet.

We need to conquer ourselves as the human collective and become a higher-order humanity compatible with life and freedom. But without embracing the Savage Daughter, we cannot give the higher-order masculine what it needs for high-order perception, agency, and meaningful problem-solving.

Perhaps we need a high-order androgynous web that balances the feminine and masculine and brings out the best in our human collective.

From one angle, we see high-order feminine energy manifesting in deep authentic connections between people and information. From another angle, high-order masculine energy layers knowledge on knowledge, in an ever-evolving quest for truth. Steel sharpens steel.

This high-order androgynous web can be the masculine extreme, deactivating the accounts of serial abusers – a digital "off with their heads!" And it can also be the feminine extreme, creating spaces for the most intimate of digital connections. Hence, the Web can be the androgynous, peaceful yet sword-wielding Athena!

We need a future web that balances masculine and feminine energies, enabling us to surf interconnected information flows. One that enables us to grow, maximize agency, coordinate, and collaborate as a collective of collectives that steers humanity towards healthy relationships with itself and the planet. Were this the next level of the Internet, it would shine a light on our collective shadow, enabling us to move forward in balance and alignment, so that humanity ascends to the next level of consciousness. Anything short of this risks utter disaster.

Notes

1. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/first-escape-room-experience](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/first-escape-room-experience)

2. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/boyce-watkins-video](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/boyce-watkins-video)

3. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/steve-jobs-documentary](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/steve-jobs-documentary)

4. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/apple-presentation-video](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/apple-presentation-video)

5. [https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/savage-daughter-blog-video](https://permanent.link/to/the-metaweb/savage-daughter-blog-video)

6. Of the Shire Shattered Oak, Principality of Northshield in the Middle Kingdom.

7. Brigitte, Brigid, Brigid, or Bridgit is both the name of the Celtic deity for all things high including intelligence and wisdom and the name of the DAO – Bridgit DAO – that we started in 2018 to bring bridging to the world.
